---
layout: post
title: Tufte Demo
comments: false
---

^^In addition to basic^^ markdown features like _emphasis,_ **strong text,** [links](https://example.com), and `inline code`, the tufte-markdown parser pays special attention to figures and footnotes. The official [Tufte-CSS site](https://edwardtufte.github.io/tufte-css/) explains the more advanced features in detail, but we're trying to poke and prod things a bit to eliminate some of the manual HTML entry that's still necessary. <!--more-->

Let's say that we want multiple paragraphs per section, and have subsequent sections use the "new-thought" small-caps differentiation. Can we achieve that with some manual HTML first?

^^In his later works,^^ Tufte did not even use h2-level headings to separate sections. Isn't that special? I wonder how feasible it is to do such a thing with custom Markdown extensions. Currently, if I run a stand-alone build, the custom plugin works. But if I modify the markdown and save, the rebuild fails to parse the carets. (Just kidding...)

^^Here's where [things](https://example.com) get^^ really exciting. Markdown footnotes[^bolt-on] are a convenient way to move digressions and asides out of the primary flow of a document. However, shoving them to the bottom of a long page is no good. In his books, Tufte instead uses "side notes,"[^vocab] which keep the asides as close as possible to the related text without breaking the flow.

[^bolt-on]: Footnotes weren't actually part of the original Markdown spec, but they've become a popular bolt-on.

[^vocab]: Definitely a made-up word.

{>|} What happens if I mix sidenotes and old-style margins? With so much text that they start overlapping all over the place.

If you want a sidenote without footnote-style numberings, then you want a margin note^[{-} This is a margin note. Notice there isn’t a number preceding the note.]. On large screens, a margin note is just a sidenote that omits the reference number. This lessens the distracting effect taking away from the flow of the main text, but can increase the cognitive load of matching a margin note to its referent text. However, on small screens, a margin note is like a sidenote except its viewability-toggle is a symbol rather than a reference number. This document currently uses the symbol ⊕ (`&#8853;`), but it’s up to you.

## Testing Header [Links](https://example.com)

I'm starting with an second-tier heading to work on what a header-link-copy button might look like.
Eventually, I want similar link styling on new-thoughts too.
