---
layout: post
title: Lucas's Theorem
comments: false
---

Let's explore a theorem that breaks massive combinatorial problems down into
hand-computable pieces. <!--more-->

## Motivation

Combination questions take the form of "how many ways can you choose $y$ items
from $x$ options?" If you've got six flowers, all different colors, how many
ways can you choose three of them for a small bouquet?

The standard syntax and factorial definition of combinations^[Combinations are
better known as _binomial coefficients_.] are:

$$
\binom{n}{k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}
$$

While accurate, the above formula is difficult to deal with for even moderately
large values. The value of $\binom{1000}{300}$ is practically intractible using
factorials. Most applications don't even have a use for a number that large.

Taking the residue constrains the magnitude of the final result, but the
computation is still prodigious:

$$
\binom{n}{k} \equiv{} x \mod m
$$

Assuming the modulus $m$ is prime-powered, Lucas's theorem gives us a useful
decomposition of this problem.

## Theorem Declaration

A binomial coefficient under a prime modulus $p$ is congruent to the product of
the binomial coefficients created by the base-$p$ digits of the original
coefficient. In mathematical notation:

$$
\binom{n}{k} \equiv{} \prod_{i=0}^{d} \binom{n_i}{k_i} \mod p
$$

For example, take the $\binom{1000}{300}$ example from above. Convert the two
values to base 7:

$$
\begin{align*}
1000 &= 2 * 7^3 + 6 * 7^2 + 2 * 7^1 + 6 * 7^0\\
300 &= 0 * 7^3 + 6 * 7^2 + 0 * 7^1 + 6 * 7^0
\end{align*}
$$

The coefficients to the powers of 7 are inserted into the binomial coefficient
product:

$$
\begin{align*}
\binom{1000}{300} &\equiv{} \binom{2}{0} \binom{6}{6} \binom{2}{0} \binom{6}{6} & \mod p\\
&\equiv{} 1*1*1*1 & \mod p\\
&\equiv{} 1 & \mod p
\end{align*}
$$

Considering the fact that the non-residue value is approximately
$5.4 * 10^{263}$, computing a residue so efficiently with Lucas's theroem is
quite a feat.

## Proof

We use the "binomial" characteristic of binomial coefficients as the basis of
the proof.

$$
\begin{align*}
\sum_{c=0}^{r} \binom{r}{c} x^c &= (1+x)^r\\
&= \prod_{m=0}^{k} (1+x)^{r_m p^m}
\end{align*}
$$

The product is simply using the base-$p$ expansion of $r$.

## Lemma

To go much further we need to justify a binomial quirk. For prime $p$:

$$
(1+x)^{p^m} \equiv (1+x^{p^m}) \mod p
$$

Let's look at the binomial coefficients. The factorial definition gives that
$\binom{p^m}{k} = \frac{p^m}{k} * \binom{p^m-1}{k-1}$. Multiply $k$ over and the
result is:

$$
k * \binom{p^m}{k} = p^m * \binom{p^m-1}{k-1}
$$

The right-hand side is divisible by $p$ at least $m$ times, and since
$k \leq p^m$, $k$ will be divisible by $p$ at most $p-1$ times (or equal $p^m$).
Binomial coefficients are integers, so $p$ must divide $\binom{p^m}{k}$ for
every $0 < k < p^m$. The boundary cases are each $1$ by definition.

Any coefficient divisible by $p$ is congruent to $0 \mod p$, which leaves only
the first and last terms in the binomial expansion: $1$, and $x^{p^m}$. The
aforementioned congruence follows.

^^Returning to^^ the main equation:

$$
\begin{align*}
\prod_{m=0}^{k} (1+x)^{r_m p^m} &= \prod_{m=0}^{k} ((1+x)^{p^m})^{r_m}\\
&\equiv \prod_{m=0}^{k} (1+x^{p^m})^{r_m} \mod p
\end{align*}
$$

Expand that inner binomial out into a sum:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\prod_{m=0}^{k} \sum_{s=0}^{r_m} \binom{r_m}{s} (x^{p^m})^s\\
=&\prod_{m=0}^{k} \sum_{s=0}^{r_m} \binom{r_m}{s} x^{sp^m} \mod p
\end{align*}
$$

The distributive law allows us to move the inner sum outside, turning it into an
iterated sum:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\prod_{m=0}^{k} \sum_{s=0}^{r_m} \binom{r_m}{s} x^{sp^m}\\
=& \sum_{s_0=0}^{r_0} \sum_{s_1=0}^{r_1} \dotsm \sum_{s_k=0}^{r_k} \prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{s_m} x^{s_mp^m} \mod p
\end{align*}
$$

Consider the set of $(s_0, s_1, \dots s_k)$. The $x$ term in the inner product
becomes $x^{s_0p^0} * x^{s_1p^1} * \dots x^{s_kp^k}$, making the combined
exponent $s_0p^0 + s_1p^1 + \dots s_kp^k$.

In other words, **the sets of $s$ are the base-$p$ representations of each
term's exponent**.

- When all $s_m = 0$, the exponent is $0$.
- When all $s_m = r_m$, the exponent is $r$.

Now, recall our original summation variable $c: 0 \leq c \leq r$. It would be
nice to replace the iterated sum with a simple $\sum_{c=0}^{r}$, but _not every
number from $0$ to $r$ is necessarily represented in the iterated sum_.
Consider, for example, $c=p^e - 1$ where $e < k$. All of the $c_m = p-1$, the
maximum valid coefficient value, but not all $r_m$ necessarily go that high.

Nonetheless, the replacement sum can still be justified if, for each of those
extra cases where $c_m > r_m$, the resulting term is $0$. Consider the binomial
coefficient at one of those cases: $\binom{r_m}{c_m} = 0$ when the inequality is
true^[After all, one cannot "choose" more items than exist in the set.].

Let's collapse that iterated sum using that justification:

$$
\begin{align*}
& \sum_{s_0=0}^{r_0} \sum_{s_1=0}^{r_1} \dotsm \sum_{s_k=0}^{r_k} \prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{s_m} x^{s_mp^m}\\
=& \sum_{c=0}^{r} \prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{c_m} x^{c_mp^m}\\
=& \sum_{c=0}^{r} \Bigg[\prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{c_m} * \prod_{m=0}^{k} x^{c_mp^m}\Bigg]\\
=& \sum_{c=0}^{r} \Bigg[\prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{c_m} * x^c\Bigg] \mod p
\end{align*}
$$

We now have a structure that closely parallels our original expression:

$$
\sum_{c=0}^{r} \binom{r}{c} x^c \equiv \sum_{c=0}^{r} \prod_{m=0}^{k} \binom{r_m}{c_m} x^c \mod p
$$

Compare each coefficient, and you arrive at the theorem statement.

$\square$
