---
layout: post
---

# Peter and the Wolf Brainstorming

Peter: Intern, associate

Bird: Backend developer

Duck: Frontend developer

Cat: QA engineer

Grandfather: manager, executive

Wolf: bug, vulnerability

Hunters: SRE team

---

Scrum master
Product manager
Frontend
Backend
QA engineer

---

Early one morning, Peter opened the gate and walked out into the big green
meadow.  On a branch of a big tree sat a little bird, Peter's friend. "All is
quiet" chirped the bird happily.  Just then a duck came waddling round. She was
glad that Peter had not closed the gate and decided to take a nice swim in the
deep pond in the meadow.  Seeing the duck, the little bird flew down upon on the
grass, settled next to her and shrugged his shoulders. "What kind of bird are
you if you can't fly?" said he. To this the duck replied "What kind of bird are
you if you can't swim?" and dived into the pond.  They argued and argued, the
duck swimming in the pond and the little bird hopping along the shore.
Suddenly, something caught Peter's attention.  He noticed a cat crawling through
the grass.  The cat thought; "That little bird is busy arguing, I'll just grab
him.  Stealthily, the cat crept towards him on her velvet paws.  "Look out!"
shouted Peter and the bird immediately flew up into the tree, while the duck
quacked angrily at the cat, from the middle of the pond.  The cat walked around
the tree and thought, "Is it worth climbing up so high? By the time I get there
the bird will have flown away." Just then grandfather came out. He was upset
because Peter had gone in the meadow.  "It's a dangerous place. If a wolf should
come out of the forest, then what would you do?" But Peter paid no attention to
his grandfather's words. Boys like him are not afraid of wolves.  But
grandfather took Peter by the hand, led him home and locked the gate.  No sooner
had Peter gone, than a big grey wolf came out of the forest.

In a twinkling the cat climbed up the tree. The duck quacked, and in her
excitement jumped out of the pond. But no matter how hard the duck tried to run,
she couldn't escape the wolf. He was getting nearer, nearer, catching up with
her. Then he got her, and with one gulp, swallowed her.  And now, this is how
things stood: the cat was sitting on one branch, the bird on another . . .  not
too close to the cat. And the wolf walked around and around the tree, looking at
them with greedy eyes.  In the meantime, Peter, without the slightest fear,
stood behind the closed gate watching all that was going on.  He ran home, got a
strong rope, and climbed up the high stone wall. One of the branches of the
tree, around which the wolf was walking, stretched out over the wall.  Grabbing
hold of the branch, Peter lightly climbed over on to the tree. Peter said to the
bird: "Fly down and circle over the wolf's head.  Only take care that he doesn't
catch you." The bird almost touched the wolf's head with his wings while the
wolf snapped angrily at him, from this side and that.  How the bird worried the
wolf! How he wanted to catch him! But the bird was clever, and the wolf simply
couldn't do anything about it.  Meanwhile, Peter made a lasso and carefully
letting it down, caught the wolf by the tail and pulled with all his might.
Feeling himself caught, the wolf began to jump wildly trying to get loose.  But
Peter tied the other end of rope to the tree, and the wolf's jumping only made
the rope around his tail tighter.  Just then, the hunters came out of the woods,
following the wolf's trail and shooting as they went.  But Peter, sitting in the
tree, said: "Don't shoot! Birdie and I have already caught the wolf. Now help us
take him to the zoo." And now, imagine the triumphant procession: Peter at the
head; after him the hunters leading the wolf; and winding up the procession,
grandfather and the cat.  Grandfather shook his head discontentedly: "Well, and
if Peter hadn't caught the wolf? What then?" Above them flew Birdie chirping
merrily. "My, what brave fellows we are, Peter and I! Look what we have caught!"
And if one would listen very carefully, he could hear the duck quacking inside
the wolf; because the wolf in his hurry, had swallowed her alive.
